12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

12.1 Mechanism of Action
Oxycodone hydrochloride, a pure opioid agonist, is relatively selective for the mu receptor, although it can interact with other opioid receptors at higher doses. In addition to analgesia, the widely diverse effects of oxycodone hydrochloride include drowsiness, changes in mood, respiratory depression, decreased gastrointestinal motility, nausea, vomiting, and alterations of the endocrine and autonomic nervous system.

Effects on the Central Nervous System (CNS)
The principal therapeutic action of oxycodone hydrochloride is analgesia. Although the precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown, specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with oxycodone hydrochloride-like activity have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and are likely to play a role in the expression and perception of analgesic effects. In common with other opioids, oxycodone hydrochloride causes respiratory depression, in part by a direct effect on the brainstem respiratory centers. Oxycodone and related opioids depress the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla. Oxycodone causes miosis, even in total darkness.

Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract And Other Smooth Muscle
Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by Oxycodone hydrochloride. Oxycodone hydrochloride, like other opioid analgesics, produces some degree of nausea and vomiting which is caused by direct stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) located in the medulla. The frequency and severity of emesis gradually diminishes with time. Oxycodone hydrochloride may cause a decrease in the secretion of hydrochloric acid in the stomach, may reduce motility, while increasing the tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm. The end result may be constipation. Oxycodone hydrochloride may also cause spasm of the sphincter of Oddi and transient elevations in serum amylase.

Effects on the Cardiovascular System
In therapeutic doses, Oxycodone hydrochloride, produces peripheral vasodilatation (arteriolar and venous), decreased peripheral resistance, and inhibits baroreceptor reflexes. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilatation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic hypotension. Caution should be used in hypovolemic patients, such as those suffering acute myocardial infarction, because oxycodone may cause or further aggravate their hypotension. Caution should also be used in patients with corpulmonale who have received therapeutic doses of opioids.

Endocrine System
Opioid agonists have been shown to have a variety of effects on the secretion of hormones. Opioids inhibit the secretion of ACTH, cortisol, and luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans. They also stimulate prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagon in humans and other species, rats and dogs. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) has been shown to be both inhibited and stimulated by opioids.

Immune System
Opioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system in in-vitro and animal models. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.

12.3 Pharmacokinetics
The activity of oxycodone hydrochloride capsules is primarily due to the parent drug oxycodone.

The oral bioavailability of oxycodone is 60% to 87%. Oxycodone is extensively metabolized and eliminated primarily in the urine as both conjugated and unconjugated parent and its metabolites. The apparent elimination half-life of oxycodone is approximately 4 hours.

Absorption
About 60 to 87% of an oral dose reaches the systemic circulation in comparison to a parenteral dose. This high oral bioavailability (compared to other opioids) is due to lower pre-systemic and/or first-pass metabolism of oxycodone.

Food Effects
When administered with a high-fat meal mean AUC values are increased by 23% and peak concentrations are decreased by 14%. Food caused a delay in Tmax (1.00 to 3.00 hours).

Distribution
Following intravenous administration, the volume of distribution (Vss) for oxycodone was 2.6 L/kg. Plasma protein binding of oxycodone at 37°C and a pH of 7.4 was about 45%. Oxycodone has been found in breast milk.

Metabolism
Oxycodone hydrochloride is extensively metabolized by multiple metabolic pathways to noroxycodone, oxymorphone, and noroxymorphone, which are subsequently glucuronidated. CYP3A4 mediated N-demethylation to noroxycodone is the primary metabolic pathway of oxycodone with less contribution from CYP2D6 mediated O-demethylation to oxymorphone. Therefore, the formation of these and related metabolites can, in theory, be affected by other drugs. The major circulating metabolite is noroxycodone with an AUC ratio of 0.6 relative to that of oxycodone. Noroxycodone is reported to be a considerably weaker analgesic than oxycodone. Oxymorphone, although possessing analgesic activity, is present in the plasma only in low concentrations. The correlation between oxymorphone concentrations and opioid effects was much less than that seen with oxycodone plasma concentrations. The analgesic activity profile of other metabolites is not known.

Excretion
Oxycodone and its metabolites are excreted primarily via the kidney. The amounts measured in the urine have been reported as follows: free oxycodone up to 19%; conjugated oxycodone up to 50%; free oxymorphone 0%; conjugated oxymorphone <14%; both free and conjugated noroxycodone have been found in the urine but not quantified. The total plasma clearance was 0.8 L/min for adults.

Apparent elimination half-life of oxycodone following the administration of oxycodone is approximately 4 hours.

Special Populations

Elderly: Information obtained from oxycodone tablets indicate that the plasma concentrations of oxycodone did not appear to be increased in patients over the age of 65.

Gender: Information obtained from oxycodone tablets support the lack of gender effect on the pharmacokinetics of oxycodone.

Renal Impairment: Information obtained from oxycodone tablets indicate that patients with renal impairment (defined as creatinine clearance <60 mL/min) had higher plasma concentrations of oxycodone than subjects with normal renal function.

Hepatic Impairment: Since oxycodone is extensively metabolized, its clearance may decrease in patients with hepatic impairment.

Drug-Drug Interactions

CYP3A4 Inhibitors
CYP3A4 is the major enzyme involved in noroxycodone formation. A published study showed that the co-administration of voriconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, increased oxycodone AUC and Cmax by 3.6 and 1.7 fold, respectively.

CYP3A4 Inducers
A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, decreased oxycodone AUC and Cmax values by 86% and 63%, respectively.

CYP2D6 Inhibitors
Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via the cytochrome p450 isoenzyme CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs and antidepressants), such blockade has not yet been shown to be of clinical significance with this agent.